One night
of this [__]
All
right.
Technically,
that's a PB. That's the most I've done
for that variation, which is a high bust
letter squat. This is D load week. And
today, I want to talk to you about de
loing. So that was pretty hard. Very
hard. In fact, I had to kind of like
give myself a good talking to because I
did the first set and it was heavy and I
thought
I don't know if I'm going to get that
second rep up. So I I came in I wanted
two reps and um anyway, the first set I
just I don't know. It was a confidence
thing, whatever it was.
But that's what I do. I look back at the
video and I assess where I broke down,
if there was a breakdown, what went
wrong and sometimes I just look at
myself in the video and I say, "You just
weren't pushing hard enough." And I
think that if you push a little bit
harder, you'll get it next time. So, I
came in
with that strategy of let's just push a
little bit harder and see what happens.
So, that's what happened. Uh, and I got
my two reps. Not sure how the form was.
I know it went all the way down and all
the way up sometimes. Let's see. First
rep. Yeah. So, so
second rep. This one was a bit harder.
Not bad. I mean, not perfect.
No one's perfect. Come on. Uh, but
anyway, that was good. I'm happy with
that. So, that's um that's set one.
Today, I'm de loing. Right now, I want
to talk to you about D loses and the
rules that I like to follow with D
losses so that hopefully you can follow
the same rules and understand whether or
not you deserve a D lo or not. Um, so
firstly, what is the idea of a D lo? The
idea of a D lode is to reduce fatigue so
that you can perform at a high level.
There's many ways of de loing. One way
is to take a week off. That's not my
way. And if you've ever read any
research papers, which they exist, in
fact, I believe it was 2024, Dr. Coleman
and colleagues did their research paper
on Dloads where they took two groups of
lifters and they did a nineweek study.
One group took an entire week off in the
middle of that. So four weeks on, one
week off, four weeks on again, and
another group who trained all the way
through. And the group that trained all
the way through saw superior results. So
what's the conclusion of that research?
Dodes don't work. Not so fast. I
wouldn't de lo like that. So my de lo
strategy is to continue to work. Now
there's a few different ways of
continuing to work. My favorite way is
usually you think about what is the
biggest contributor to fatigue
and that's usually volume. So a lot of
research shows us that the volume the
accumulation of volume is more fatiguing
than how much weight you actually lift.
So lifting really really heavy of course
it's fatiguing but not as fatiguing as
the volume. So therefore, the first
thing that I consider when I'm going to
be doing a dload load is how can I
reduce the amount of volume that I'm
doing
without having to reduce how much weight
I'm lifting. So maintaining intensity
but reducing volume and that's usually
my favorite way of de loing. That's not
what I'm doing today though. So my
favorite way of de loing is, you know,
you can plan for it. So you can just put
it in, you know, proactive de los. So if
you do four weekly programs, the last
week of every program, this is a really
nice strategy that I really like doing.
Some people might be against it because
they think you don't need a D lo or that
study said that D loads didn't work.
Remember, it's not this type of D load.
It's not the same type of strategy. But
either way, the reason why I'd say
proactive D lo can be great for some
people is because a lot of people don't
understand. So, the alternative to being
proactive is reactive de loing, which is
where you're kind of training and you
feel like it's not going to go well for
me today. Um, so therefore, I deserve a
bit of a de lo. Now, just so you know,
that's what I just did now, right? It
wasn't feeling great this week, so
that's why I've given myself a reactive
D lo. I was hoping to go heavy this
week, but it was reactive. Either way,
I've been training for 20 years and I'm
not perfect at it, but I am a lot better
at realizing when it's not a great week
and when it is. So, this week was a
reactive de lo, but a proactive de lo is
something that I advocate because a lot
of people don't have that training
experience and training intuition to
know when it's a bad week or not. Okay?
So, a lot of people come in and they
say, "I'm tired or whatever and I
believe I deserve a D lo." That's not
what I'm using to gauge whether I need a
D lo or not. I'm always tired and
sometimes when I'm tired I perform
really really well. And on the flip side
of that, sometimes when I'm feeling
amazing,
I perform really, really poorly. Okay,
so a nice quote for you is how you feel
is a lie. It's a very simple quote, but
I learned that from John Bros, amazing
weightlifting coach. And yeah, how you
feel is a lie, which I wholeheartedly
believe in. Um, and based on exactly
that, sometimes you come in and you feel
great and you perform poorly. And
sometimes you feel terrible and you
perform very very well. So that's not
what I'm basing my reactive dloads on. I
get under the bar and feel the weight
and it tells me whether I get the weight
or not. And I use my last videos of, you
know, every previous week of my warm-up
sets. And I compare my warm-up sets now
to my warm-up sets from last week. And I
see uh did I move it as well? Did I
improve this week from last week? Uh, if
the answer is no, not only did you not
improve, but you also went backwards.
That's when I'll say, this is what I
said this week, that's when I'll say,
all right, fatigue's kicking in. I'll
give myself a bit of a reactive D lo.
Anyway, back to proactive D losses. So,
that's me being, you know, using my
experience, which is 20 plus years of
experience as a high level lifter, uh,
to make that decision. But I teach
people to be proactive and learn
structure before you start to free flow
or autoregulate is another word you may
have heard of. Autoregulating is an very
is a very wise way of training. It's
very intelligent if you know how to do
it well. So some people just go, "Oh
yeah, not feeling up for it. So I'll
autoregulate because autoregulation is
an intelligent way of doing it. So
that's what I'm doing." Okay. So how do
you learn how to be intuitive? How do
you learn experience? By experiencing
it. And this is my favorite way by
starting with structure and then in time
you start to develop a feel for what it
actually feels like to be fatigued and
actually require a D lo. So the strategy
is how long is your program? So let's
just say argument sake my programs I
like to do four weekly meo cycles and
the way that I structure it is week one
I start conservative to allow room to be
able to add weight to the bar every time
I come into the gym. So week one is the
easiest and then how much weight do you
add to the bar? You know, I like to say
roughly about 5% every week, right? So,
so week one should be still challenging
but a little bit conservative. You
should walk out of the session feeling
like you could have done more. Then week
two, you do more. How much more? Roughly
5%. Week three, another 5%. Week four,
this is where we apply the proactive de
lo, which is where we say, I still want
to go heavier. So, we're de loing by
reducing volume, not intensity. So you
maintain the logical incremental
increase. So what does that mean? 100 kg
or 100% go up by 5%. So 100 on week one
for 5x5. Then 105 for 5x5. Then 110 for
5x5. And then on week four we still go
up by another five. So that's 115. But
instead of doing five by five, we can
cut the total sets in half. How do you
do that? So either two sets or three
sets. Uh depending on how strong you
are, how you're feeling. Usually I say
go conservative. So cut it in half and
round down. So instead of doing five
sets of five on the heaviest week, you
do two sets of five. And that's a really
really nice way of training, especially
if you set your numbers up well, which
is week one starting conservative. But
then week four, the end of the messo
cycle, you're setting yourself up for
numbers that when you wrote the program
on week one, you look at those numbers
and you say, I probably wouldn't be able
to get those today. I want to give
myself a few weeks of practicing,
understanding the feeling of the energy
levels that's required to hit these
numbers and hopefully improving a little
bit over the next three weeks before
week four is kind of like hitting a
number that I'm unable to do four weeks
out. Does that make sense? So therefore,
week four, you should be going really,
really heavy to the point where you
probably can't do five sets of five.
Right? So that's the argument is is
whether you need to de load or not. So,
this is the camp of people that say, you
know, you don't need D losses and you
can train all the way through and all
these things. I'll tell you right now,
what if you do do a D lo and you don't
deserve it. Depends on the strategy. If
your strategy is, let's just take a
whole week off and you didn't deserve
it, you probably come back a little bit
drained and it probably wasn't that
effective. Now, flip side, let's just
say you do come in and you do go
heavier, right? So, you go to the
logical incremental increase of 5% every
week on week four is the heaviest week.
You come in, you smash your set, maybe
do another set, and then you get out of
there. You finish the session in half
the time it normally takes because
you've done half the volume, but you
still walk out of the session feeling
great because you've hit the numbers
that you planned. You've progressed to
the number that you you wanted to
progress to. And that equals a proactive
de lo strategy. Now, it doesn't end
there because what happens at the end of
week four? We go to week one of the next
mess cycle. How did we start week one?
Remember we started week one with
conservative loads to allow room to be
able to progress every week. So that
means what is conservative loads doing
with your recovery? Well, this is the
debate of what is a bigger contributor
to fatigue and recovery? Is it the
amount of volume that you're doing,
which I believe and a lot of the
research points towards, but then you
got a lot of people that say the amount
of weight you lift also contributes,
which I also believe in. So therefore,
week four of your program, we're cutting
the volume in half. There's your de lo
by volume. Then on week one of the next
phase, we're starting with conservative
load. So therefore, we've reduced the
intensity. So it's kind of like two
weeks in a row of
kind of de loing, right? So that's a
strategy where I don't even care if you
call it a D lo or not. I don't really
call week one a D load. I call it start
conservative and allow room to progress.
Week four, I say, you know, that's the
fun week. you can call it de load week
or whatever it is where you push the
numbers to heights that you weren't able
to achieve on week one of the plan and
you reward yourself by only doing half
the amount of sets. So in my opinion if
you follow that strategy at home forever
and you just continue to repeat that
process over every four-weekly mess
cycle. There's another topic. How long
is the mess cycle? Is it 4 weeks or 6
weeks or 8 weeks or whatever it is?
Choose your number. Same rule applies.
Week one is the lightest loads. Week the
final week of the messo cycle is the
heaviest weights of the phase. Cut the
volume in half. There's your proactive
de lo. Now, what I'm doing is different.
What I'm doing is a reactive de lo. Now,
I'll tell you my strategy. This week, I
came in, my bench press was low. Uh, you
know what? I even tried to warm up with
my squats and everything just didn't
feel right. It didn't feel It felt
heavy. Everything felt heavy. And it
still feels damn heavy. And I do believe
that my energy levels are low. Now, why
could that be? Well, here's the things
that I typically ask. So, me as a coach,
when I'm coaching someone and they come
to me and they say things like, "I feel
weak." Or, "I missed a rep." Right? The
weight that you prescribed is too heavy.
Here's the questions that I ask, the
first thing that I ask is, "What's your
body weight?" Now, if the answer is,
I've lost a kilogram, a pound, 2 kg, 2
lb, whatever it might be, there's
typically a very good reason why you're
not feeling as strong, right? So, that's
where I ask the next question, which is,
well, what is your goal? Is your goal to
lose weight or to continue to gain
strength? And if the answer is, my goal
is to lose weight. Then I'll say great,
you've done well, you've lost weight,
but then I need to manage your
expectations where if you lose weight,
especially depending on how much weight
you lose. There is a good chance that
your strength is going to be negatively
impacted by that weight loss. The
greater the weight loss, the greater the
chance you're not going to be feeling
strong. Is that making sense? If you're
lighter, there's a big answer for why
you're not feeling as strong. Therefore,
what's the answer to that? Manage your
expectations. So, if your goal is to
lose weight, you've done well. If your
goal is not to lose weight and to gain
strength, then you haven't done well.
You haven't eaten enough and it's time
to go and put some more food in your
mouth, right? Intelligently, of course.
What does intelligent mean? Don't just
stuff your face with shitty food. You
know, eat the right macros, eat high
quality food if available for you, which
it should be. You should prioritize your
nutrition. But that is like that's the
biggest uh determining factor of your
success in the long term is is are you
eating enough food to fuel for your
performance. Now here's the next thing.
If you come back and I say to you uh
what's your body weight and you say it's
the same or I've even gotten heavier.
Then I'll ask the next questions which
could be things like how's your sleep
been? How many hours of sleep are you
getting? Is there any change? Are there
any other stresses in your life,
external stresses that aren't relative
to everything that's got to do with
training and recovery and and everything
like that? So, we're right. We're doing
intelligent programming. We're getting 8
hours of sleep. We're eating all of your
macros and enough calories and we're
doing all of that. Is there another
reason why you could be performing
poorly? Yes, there could be. Things like
external stresses, financial stresses,
relationship stresses. These are things
that can contribute to your performance
in the gym. And these are things that
I'll factor in as a coach with the
people that I'm working with. Sometimes
you might be going through a breakup or
you might have lost your job or you
might be strapped for cash or whatever
it might be and that might be the reason
why you are negatively impacted in your
strength levels. Now, here's the thing.
Training with weights, as good for you
as it is, and all types of training is
good for you as it is, it is another
stressor. It's a stressor that
contributes to your overall stress.
stress from training, stress from, you
know, if you're not sleeping, whatever
it is, stress from relationships,
stress, financial stresses, external
stresses, they all add up. And if that's
you, I work with people that are company
directors of, you know, multi-million
dollar companies, and that involves a
lot of stress. And these people
typically, I work with them, and and
they don't always perform. And it's
like, what's going on with work? It's
like, yeah, I'm under a lot of stress.
And this is where I have discussions
with them and I say, you know, like
maybe let's figure out what's the most
important stress for you. Is your
business more important than your
training right now? And the answer is
usually depending on who if it's a
professional athlete, it's like no,
training is more important. But most
people that I work with aren't
professional athletes, right? So, if
it's a company director that work is
more important, then I'll say to them,
let's just reduce the stress for a
little bit. Let's just back off your
training and let's just not push as
hard. Let's just give yourself a little
bit of an unload. I didn't say de load.
I said an unload. Let's just lighten the
load a little bit. Let's just reduce the
volume or reduce the weights. Just take
it easy for a little bit. Anyway, that's
a very long-winded response to whether
or not D losses work. The answer, the
short answer is absolutely they work.
The longer answer is what I just gave
you. Uh you might not need a D load. And
if you do need a D lo, there's a
strategy for that. There's reactive D
loads, there's proactive D losses,
there's reduction in volume, there's
reduction in load. It's not just a right
and wrong answer that a lot of people
like to say D loads are good or D loads
are bad. Does that make sense? I hope it
does. Anyway, so that's my top set. So,
what's my D load strategy? My D load
strategy is today is to choose a
variation that I'm not going to
disappoint myself. So, I still like I
believe in training morale. So, my last
session was five reps.
Yeah, it was five reps on 250 kg. The
week before was six reps on 240. So,
this week was supposed to be four reps
on 260.
I didn't think I was up for it this
week. Oh, by the way, I have lost 3 kg
this week. So,
maybe it's that. I would say quite
definitely it's that. Am I sad about it?
No, because I'm looking a little bit
leaner. I'm feeling a little bit leaner
and my overall goal is health at the
moment. I'm not competing. So, it's
like, you know what? Give yourself a
little bit of a break. I don't mind
being a little bit leaner right now. Uh
the food that I'm eating is really good
and I'm feeling great about it. You
know, a little bit of a tangent on
what's going on in my life, but this is
what goes on in most people's lives and
this is how I'm approaching my training
is I'm setting myself up. So, if I
wanted to do 260 kg squats today, I'd
walk out of the session. I would have
failed the weight. So, that's why I
don't want to attempt it. I'm not strong
enough to do it today. Uh it requires
for me to be on point and I know that
I'm not on point. So, what's the option?
I could do a lighter version of that
exercise which is kind of boring. I'd
walk out of the session going whatever
feeling pretty underwhelmed or
right I can choose an accessory exercise
which is what I did and I know that I've
still progressed in my training and
that's how I measure my progression is I
say let's choose an accessory exercise
that I haven't done for a while and see
if that's improved. So my best before
this was one rep on that now I've done
two. So, instead of walking out of the
session going, uh, I didn't hit what I
wanted today. I didn't go for my big
heavy squats. I'm now walking out of my
session going, okay, the exercise
variation that I chose today was was a
variation, a much lighter variation, and
I showed myself that I'm stronger than
what I was the last time I did that. So,
I walk out of the session feeling
fantastic. But, I've only done one set.
So, now I've done a lot of talking. So,
what I'm going to do is a little bit
more accessory work. I don't mind those
squats. Uh, stiletto squats. Um, maybe
I'll do a little bit more volume on
that. So, I'm gonna because I've spoken
for a little bit. I don't mind. I've got
not much on. It's Friday. I'm going to
rewarm up again. So, I'm going to bring
it down to 70 kg and and very very
quickly bring it back to a decent weight
and maybe do a couple of sets of eight.
Pair that with some hamstring curls.
Walk out of the session with a bit of a
quadricep pump. Make me feel good about
myself for the weekend. Uh, and then I'm
just going to call it a day. So, I will
do hamstring curls. Um, and I might uh
just that's about it. I'll do a couple
of sets of eight on a moderate weight.
I'll do a couple of sets of eight or
three sets of eight on a hamstring curl.
Um, and that's going to be my session.
But anyway, um, I guess I don't know if
my videographer wants to add in my
accessories, uh, my back down work.
We'll add that in. But that's enough
talking. That's enough education. I hope
you learned something about D loads
today. Uh, and my mindset towards my own
training as well as how I think about
when I what I think about when I'm
coaching any of my athletes. When I say
athletes, I call all the people I work
with athletes. Whether you're the
strongest man in the world or general
population, just people, everyday people
like maybe a lot of you watching this at
home. I call everyone athletes. And now
you know my approach to program design
and using dloads for my programming. And
I hope you liked it. Uh, but anyway,
that's me. I hope you enjoyed that. And,
uh, if there's anything you want me to
talk about next time, put it in the
comments and, uh, I'm at your service.
>> Did you think about like backing off
after you did the first set of 20?
>> Okay. I don't know if you can hear uh
the question that he asked, but he just
asked me, "Did I think about backing off
after my first set of 220?" Yeah, I did.
I did. I looked at it and it's like h
it's just like I'm de loing for a
reason. And that reason is my energy
levels aren't high. But then I looked at
it, it's like I'm going to walk out of
this session just feeling [__] if I
don't go for it. And I looked at it and
it's like come on, what's the answer to
this question? Can you work a little bit
harder and can you get that? And the
answer is yes. And the answer was yes.
And I came in and got it. But yep, it
did go through my mind that that was
hard. And should I just throw in the
towel now?
That was on the cards. I could have
thrown in the towel and I absolutely
wanted to throw in the towel, but you
know, I'm different. You know what I
mean? Like, this is what I do. I've been
I'm a fanatic with my training and I
know how I feel. I would have started
the weekend on a [__] note and just
gone, "Oh, ineffective training week."
Would it have been ineffective?
Objectively, not that ineffective, but
now it's even more effective. Training
morale is high. I just hit a PB. It's
Friday. We're feeling good. You know
what I'm saying? That's the psychology
of lifting. How much science is involved
in that? Not a lot, right? But this is a
practical sport, right? So, we don't get
better in this sport by reading about
it. We get better by getting under and
doing it. Now, I'm not discounting the
science. I'm not discounting
the theory behind all of this and
understanding. That's what I'm trying to
teach you guys. It all matters. But what
matters more sometimes is just growing a
pair of balls. Metaphorically, ladies
out there,
no offense, I'm sure that my audience
don't get offended by me speaking like
that, but sometimes all you need to do
is [__] step up. And that's what I
did.
And we're happy.